Import VMware VMs into KVM - Documentation (#342)
apache/cloudstack-documentation: source/adminguide/virtual_machines/importing_vmware_vms_into_kvm.rst

The virt-v2v output is logged on the CloudStack agent logs to help administrators tracking the progress on the Virtual Machines conversion processes. The verbose mode for virt-v2v can be enabled by adding the following line to /etc/cloudstack/agent/agent.properties and restart cloudstack-agent:

    ::

        virtv2v.verbose.enabled=true

Installing virt-v2v on Ubuntu KVM hosts does not install nbdkit which is required in the conversion of VMWare VCenter guests. To install it, please execute:

    ::

        apt install nbdkit

Supported Distributions for KVM Hypervisor:

.. cssclass:: table-striped table-bordered table-hover

========================    ========================
Linux Distribution          Supported Versions
========================    ========================
Alma Linux                  8, 9
Red Hat Enterprise Linux    8, 9
Rocky Linux                 8, 9
Ubuntu                      22.04 LTS
========================    ========================

Importing Windows guest VMs from VMware requires installing the virtio drivers on the hypervisor hosts for the virt-v2v conversion.

> On RHEL9 hosts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On (RH)EL hosts:
```

    ::

>         yum -y install http://jenkins.openvm.eu/files/virtio-win/virtio-win-1.9.33-0.el9_2.noarch.rpm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        yum install virtio-win
```

>         yum -y install http://jenkins.openvm.eu/files/virtio-win/virtio-win-1.9.33-0.el9_2.noarch.rpm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        yum install virtio-win
        You can also install virtio-win manually from  https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm
```

>         yum -y install http://jenkins.openvm.eu/files/virtio-win/virtio-win-1.9.33-0.el9_2.noarch.rpm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        yum install virtio-win
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also install the RPM manually from  https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also install the RPM from https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm
```

> For other Linux distributions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Debian-based distributions:
```

> You can also install the RPM from https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You can also install the RPM from [https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm](https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm)
```

    ::

>         yum -y install https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        apt install virtio-win
```

Selecting the VM from a VMware Datacenter
-----------------------------------------

CloudStack administrators must select the Source VMware Datacenter:

    - Existing: The existing zones are listed, and for each zone CloudStack will list if there is any VMware Datacenter associated to it. In case it is, it can be selected
    - External: CloudStack allows listing Virtual Machines from a VMware Datacenter that is not associated to any CloudStack zone. To do so, it needs the vCenter IP address, the datacenter name, and username and password credentials to log in the vCenter.

Once the VMware Datacenter is selected, click on List VMware Instances to display the list of Virtual Machines on the Datacenter

Converting and importing a VMware VM
------------------------------------

.. note:: CloudStack allows importing Running Linux Virtual Machines, but it is recommended that the Virtual Machine to import is powered off and has been gracefully shutdown before the process starts. For Windows Virtual Machines, it is not possible to import them while running.

When importing a Virtual Machine from VMware to KVM, CloudStack performs the following actions:

>     - Cloning the Source Virtual Machine on the selected VMware Datacenter: The source Virtual Machine will be cloned in the original state (running or stopped for Linux VMs, or stopped for Windows VMs). The recommended state is the stopped state to prevent inconsistencies when cloning the virtual machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Cloning the Source Virtual Machine on the selected VMware Datacenter: The source Virtual Machine will be cloned in the original state (running or stopped for Linux VMs, or stopped for Windows VMs). The recommended state is the stopped state to prevent data inconsistencies or loss when cloning the virtual machine.
```

The virt-v2v output is logged on the CloudStack agent logs to help administrators tracking the progress on the Virtual Machines conversion processes. The verbose mode for virt-v2v can be enabled by adding the following line to /etc/cloudstack/agent/agent.properties and restart cloudstack-agent:

    ::

        virtv2v.verbose.enabled=true

Installing virt-v2v on Ubuntu KVM hosts does not install nbdkit which is required in the conversion of VMWare VCenter guests. To install it, please execute:

    ::

        apt install nbdkit

Supported Distributions for KVM Hypervisor:

.. cssclass:: table-striped table-bordered table-hover

========================    ========================
Linux Distribution          Supported Versions
========================    ========================
Alma Linux                  8, 9
Red Hat Enterprise Linux    8, 9
Rocky Linux                 8, 9
Ubuntu                      22.04 LTS
========================    ========================

Importing Windows guest VMs from VMware requires installing the virtio drivers on the hypervisor hosts for the virt-v2v conversion.

On (RH)EL hosts:

    ::

        yum install virtio-win

> You can also install the RPM from [https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm](https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also install the RPM manually from https://fedorapeople.org/groups/virt/virtio-win/direct-downloads/stable-virtio/virtio-win.noarch.rpm

```

    - External: CloudStack allows listing Virtual Machines from a VMware Datacenter that is not associated to any CloudStack zone. To do so, it needs the vCenter IP address, the datacenter name, and username and password credentials to log in the vCenter.

Once the VMware Datacenter is selected, click on List VMware Instances to display the list of Virtual Machines on the Datacenter

Converting and importing a VMware VM
------------------------------------

.. note:: CloudStack allows importing Running Linux Virtual Machines, but it is recommended that the Virtual Machine to import is powered off and has been gracefully shutdown before the process starts. For Windows Virtual Machines, it is not possible to import them while running.

When importing a Virtual Machine from VMware to KVM, CloudStack performs the following actions:

    - Cloning the Source Virtual Machine on the selected VMware Datacenter: The source Virtual Machine will be cloned in the original state (running or stopped for Linux VMs, or stopped for Windows VMs). The recommended state is the stopped state to prevent data inconsistencies or loss when cloning the virtual machine.

>     - Converting the Cloned Virtual Machine to KVM using virt-v2v: CloudStack (or the administrator) selects a running and Enabled KVM host to perform the conversion from VMware to KVM using virt-v2v. If the binary is not installed, then the host will fail the migration. In case it is installed it will perform the conversion into a temporary location (which can be selected by the administrator) to store the converted QCOW2 disks of the virtual machine. The disks are then moved into the destination storage pools for the virtual machine. The conversion process is a long-lasting process which can be set to timeout by the global setting 'convert.vmware.instance.to.kvm.timeout'. The conversion processes are long-lasting processes since virt-v2v creates a virtual machine to inspect the source VM and generate the converted disks with the correct drivers. Also, it needs to copy the converted disks into the temporary location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Converting the Cloned Virtual Machine to KVM using virt-v2v: CloudStack (or the administrator) selects a running and Enabled KVM host to perform the conversion from VMware to KVM using virt-v2v. If the binary is not installed, then the host will fail the migration. In case it is installed it will perform the conversion into a temporary location (which can be selected by the administrator) to store the converted QCOW2 disks of the virtual machine. The disks are then moved into the destination storage pools for the virtual machine. The conversion is a long-lasting process which can be set to time out by the global setting 'convert.vmware.instance.to.kvm.timeout'. The conversion processes take a long time because virt-v2v creates a temporary virtual machine to inspect the source VM and generate the converted disks with the correct drivers. Additionally, it needs to copy the converted disks into the temporary location.
```

> .. note:: Please consider not restarting the management servers during the imports since this action can cause failures on the on-going importing processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: Please consider not restarting the management servers while importing as it will lead to the interruption of the process and you will need to start again.
```

==================== ========================

|import-vm-from-vmware-to-kvm.png|

Selecting the Destination cluster
---------------------------------

CloudStack administrators must select a KVM cluster to import the VMware Virtual Machines (left side of the image above). Once a KVM cluster is selected, the VMware Datacenter selection part is displayed (right side of the image above).

Selecting the VM from a VMware Datacenter
-----------------------------------------

CloudStack administrators must select the Source VMware Datacenter:

    - Existing: The existing zones are listed, and for each zone CloudStack will list if there is any VMware Datacenter associated to it. In case it is, it can be selected
    - External: CloudStack allows listing Virtual Machines from a VMware Datacenter that is not associated to any CloudStack zone. To do so, it needs the vCenter IP address, the datacenter name, and username and password credentials to log in the vCenter.

Once the VMware Datacenter is selected, click on List VMware Instances to display the list of Virtual Machines on the Datacenter

Converting and importing a VMware VM
------------------------------------

> .. note:: CloudStack allows importing Running Linux Virtual Machines, but it is recommended that the Virtual Machine to import is powered off and has been gracefully shutdown before the process starts. For Windows Virtual Machines, it is not possible to import them while running. In case a Linux VM is imported while running, it will be converted in "crash consistent" state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: CloudStack allows importing Running Linux Virtual Machines, but it is generally recommended that the Virtual Machine to import is powered off and has been gracefully shutdown before the process starts. In case a Linux VM is imported while running, it will be converted in "crash consistent" state. For Windows Virtual Machines, it is not possible to import them while running, it is mandatory they are shut down gracefully so the filesystem is in a clean state.
```

When importing a Virtual Machine from VMware to KVM, CloudStack performs the following actions:

    - Cloning the Source Virtual Machine on the selected VMware Datacenter: The source Virtual Machine will be cloned in the original state (running or stopped for Linux VMs, or stopped for Windows VMs). The recommended state is the stopped state to prevent data inconsistencies or loss when cloning the virtual machine.

>     - Converting the Cloned Virtual Machine to KVM using virt-v2v: CloudStack (or the administrator) selects a running and Enabled KVM host to perform the conversion from VMware to KVM using virt-v2v. If the binary is not installed, then the host will fail the migration. In case it is installed it will perform the conversion into a temporary location (which can be selected by the administrator) to store the converted QCOW2 disks of the virtual machine. The disks are then moved into the destination storage pools for the virtual machine. The conversion is a long-lasting process which can be set to time out by the global setting 'convert.vmware.instance.to.kvm.timeout'. The conversion processes take a long time because virt-v2v creates a temporary virtual machine to inspect the source VM and generate the converted disks with the correct drivers. Additionally, it needs to copy the converted disks into the temporary location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Converting the Cloned Virtual Machine to KVM using virt-v2v: CloudStack (or the administrator) selects a running and Enabled KVM host to perform the conversion from VMware to KVM using **virt-v2v**. If the binary is not installed, then the host will fail the migration. In case it is installed it will perform the conversion into a temporary location (which can be selected by the administrator) to store the converted QCOW2 disks of the virtual machine. The disks are then moved into the destination storage pools for the virtual machine. The conversion is a long-lasting process which can be set to time out by the global setting 'convert.vmware.instance.to.kvm.timeout'. The conversion processes take a long time because virt-v2v creates a temporary virtual machine to inspect the source VM and generate the converted disks with the correct drivers. Additionally, it needs to copy the converted disks into the temporary location.
```

Reviewer 2: just bolding it...

.. note:: Please consider not restarting the management servers while importing as it will lead to the interruption of the process and you will need to start again.

> .. note:: The success of the import process may vary based on factors such as the current OS version, installed packages, guest OS setup, file systems, and others. Success is not guaranteed. We strongly recommend testing the migration process before proceeding with production deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note:: As mentioned above, the migration/conversion process uses an external tool, virt-v2v, which supports most but not all the operating systems out there (this is true for both the host on which the virt-v2v tool is running as well as the guest OS of the instances being migrated by the tool). Thus, the success of the import process will, almost exclusively, depend on the success of the virt-v2v conversion. In other words, the success will vary based on factors such as the current OS version, installed packages, guest OS setup, file systems, and others. Success is not guaranteed. We strongly recommend testing the migration process before proceeding with production deployments.
```
